this video is sponsored by the YouTube
red sci-fi series lifeline for ages I've
been wanting to make a video analyzing
time-travel in fiction not the magical
or physical mechanisms by which the
time-travel is supposedly achieved but
rather the different ways time-travel
can influence causality and thus the
plot within the universe of each story
needless to say there are spoilers ahead
let's start with Ender's Game by Orson
Scott Card time-travel in this book is
actually a hundred percent realistic the
characters experience slower passage of
time when they travel close to light
speed allowing just a few days or months
to pass for those traveling while years
pass on earth or other planets it's
travelling forward through time like we
normally do but at different rates
this kind of time-travel doesn't change
the past or allow characters to make
different decisions than the ones they
already did it's all one consistent
historical trajectory the original
Planet of the Apes film is similar where
astronauts experience extreme time
dilation and then crash land on a
strange planet ruled by Apes that major
spoiler turns out to just be earth in
the distant future but what about like
time travel time travel well I would say
there are two big distinguishing
features between different types of time
travel in fiction the first is whether
or not the time traveler is there when
history happens the first time around
that is is there a kind of
self-consistency where since time travel
takes you to the past when the past
happened the first time the
time-traveling version of you was always
there to begin with or does the very act
of time traveling to the Past change
what happened and forced the universe
onto a different trajectory of history
from the one you experienced prior to
traveling and the second distinguishing
feature is who has free will when
somebody is time-traveling like whose
actions are allowed to move history onto
a different trajectory and whose aren't
one of the simplest time travels is
do-over time travel it's essentially
like playing a video game where you can
start a level over with the foresight of
what you did wrong the first time for
example in Groundhog Day Bill Murray's
character relives the same day over and
over again and though he can make
different choices each time he always
starts back at the exact same point
except with new memories of his previous
choices that is until he figures out the
one exact set of choices that frees him
from Lulu
I consider Charles Dickens A Christmas
Carol to be in this vein too even though
it may not seem like time travel but
because Scrooge gets to visit the future
of his current timeline even though he
has no ability to affect the timeline
directly while visiting he can't still
change his actions in the present based
on what he learns essentially getting a
do-over the video game braid is built on
the idea of do-overs where pretty much
anytime you can rewind a few seconds and
try something different though there are
some things that are immune to going
back in time and don't rewind which is
what makes the game interesting braid
also has another kind of time travel
where you go back to your past as a
separate individual and while the past
version of you is there it has no free
will it just does exactly what you did
the first time around while the time
traveling you can change the course of
history this is also how the video clock
blockers by the corridor digital YouTube
channel works and then there's time
travel where the very act of going to
the past or future creates a fully new
trajectory of history because time
travelling you weren't there the first
time around and now you are this
includes the typical anything goes
time-travel movies like Bill & Ted's
Excellent Adventure Back to the Future
Star Trek first contact and so on where
you can kind of instantly jump back and
forth to any point in time you want
potentially resulting in multiple
versions of yourself from a causality
perspective anything you do in the past
even just the act of going back in time
redirects the course of history onto a
new timeline in Back to the Future
Marty's interference with his parents
falling in love results in the timeline
of history being redirected towards a
version of the future where he doesn't
exist and so he starts to disappear from
photos and real life even after
correcting that major deviation his
interactions with his parents while he's
in the past result in them being very
different people when he returns to his
present time he accidentally caused
history to progress in a slightly
different direction the movie looper is
similar but there's a little more
circularity because when you jump to the
past you cause history to branch onto a
trajectory where in the future the
younger you also goes back in time the
same way you just did both you and your
past self still have enough free will to
change that forward course of history
though which results in weirdness like
you getting new memories when your past
self does things you yourself didn't do
or if they lose a body part suddenly
you'll lose it too and
immediately replaced by an old scar so
changes to the present affect not just
future timelines but also future
timelines that wrap back around to the
present the indie film primer is in the
same vein except that it takes the plot
device of time-travel to the extreme
with time travel within time travel
within time travel with time traveling
characters interacting with other
time-traveling versions of themselves
bringing time machines with them to the
past inside other time machines and so
on but beyond the complexity there are
two things that make primer stand out
first time travel to the past isn't an
instantaneous jump but actually takes
time to go back six hours you sit in the
time machine for what feels like six
hours and time travel can't take you
back to a time before a given time
machine was initially activated since of
course the machine can only be taking
you back in time inside it if it's
turned on so the first time it was
turned on is the farthest back in time
you can go in a given machine there's a
nice logic to it which brings us to
perhaps my all-time favorite of all
fictional time travel Harry Potter and
the Prisoner of Azkaban it's a kind of
time travel where you instantly jump
back in time and can interact with
yourself but it doesn't generate new
timelines it manages this because in the
Harry Potter universe while you're
experiencing your initial pre
time-travel passage through a particular
point in history your time-traveling
clone is also already there doing
everything you'll eventually do when you
time-travel yourself for example Harry
and his friends are saved from dying by
their time-traveling selves the first
time history gets to that point it just
makes so much sense if you go back in
time and of course you really and truly
were at that location in time at that
time this also means that during the
period of overlap the time-traveling U
has no actual freewill since everything
you do has in some sense already been
done which Harry comprehends when he
realizes that he has to save his past
self because he was already saved by his
future self when he was in the past I
think I'd love this kind of
time-traveled because it manages to be
logically consistent its time traveled
to the Past where you can't change the
past because the past already happened
and there's only one timeline the one in
which time travelers arrive from the
future do stuff and at some later date
leave to go to the past logical
consistency is a primary thing that
you may have noticed I think lays the
foundation for good time-travel stories
not because logical consistency is
important in and of itself but because
most of the time in order to care about
the characters in a story we have to
believe that actions have consequences
if everything is just a meaningless
series of events then we almost don't
have a story so it's really helpful if
there are rules by which the universe of
the story functions whatever those rules
may be
speaking of actions with consequences I
finally got the kick in the pants I
needed to make this video from my
friends at the corridor digital YouTube
channel they've asked me to help promote
their new YouTube read original series
lifeline which minor spoilers ahead is a
sci-fi action thriller with time travel
in it what kind of time travel you asked
essentially if somebody dies in the
future that sends a message back to the
present which allows people to jump
forward to just before the time the
person dies and changed the trajectory
of history from that point onwards
averting their death but as you might
imagine things eventually go awry I
highly recommend you check out the first
episode of lifeline which you can do for
free on the corridor digital channel or
by following the links on screen or in
the description and fun facts I actually
know the corridor guys from back before
minutephysics
existed when I was doing special effects
for the Freddy W youtube channel we also
all happen to grow up in neighboring
towns in Minnesota and even competed
against each other in high school sports
though we didn't know each other at the
time but enough trivia go check out
lifeline
[Music]